Proposal: Add type and unit metadata labels (#39)
prometheus/proposals: proposals/2024-09-25_metadata-labels.md

## Type and Unit Metadata Labels

* **Owners:**
  * David Ashpole [@dashpole](https://github.com/dashpole)

* **Implementation Status:** `Not implemented`

* **Related Issues and PRs:**
  * https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/2497

* **Other docs or links:**
  * Survey Results: https://opentelemetry.io/blog/2024/prometheus-compatibility-survey/
  * Slack thread: https://cloud-native.slack.com/archives/C01AUBA4PFE/p1726399373207819
  * Doc with Options: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1t4ARkyOoI4lLNdKb0ixbUz7k7Mv_eCiq7sRKHAGZ9vg
  * Prometheus PoC: https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/compare/main...dashpole:prometheus:type_and_unit_labels

This document proposes adding the metric type and unit as labels on metrics.

## Why

> Per [dev-summit consensus](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1uurQCi5iVufhYHGlBZ8mJMK_freDFKPG0iYBQqJ9fvA/edit#bookmark=id.q6upqm7itl24), we would like to avoid adding type and unit suffixes to metric names when translating from OpenTelemetry to Prometheus. These suffixes are currently required by the [compatibility specification](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/compatibility/prometheus_and_openmetrics.md). However, OpenTelemetry currently considers the metric type and unit identifying, whereas Prometheus does not. Simply removing suffixes might result in "collisions" between distinct OpenTelemetry metrics which have the same name, but different types (less commonly) or units.

Author: added.

### Audience

This document is for Prometheus server maintainers, PromQL maintainers, and anyone interested in furthering compatibility between Prometheus and OpenTelemetry.

## Non-Goals

* Prometheus will not attempt to auto-convert between units when there is a conflict.
* Prometheus will not attempt to auto-convert between types (e.g. native histogram vs float series).
* Prometheus client libraries will not allow mixing metrics with the same name, but different type or unit in the exposition format. See potential future extensions.

## User Experience

When querying for a metric, users can filter for a type or unit by specifying a filter on the `__unit__` or `__type__` labels, which use the reserved `__` prefix to ensure they do not collide with user-provided labels.

For example:

* `my_metric{}` returns all series with any type or unit, including `__type__` and `__unit__` labels.
* `my_metric{__unit__="seconds", __type__="counter"}` returns only series with the specified type and unit.

When a query for a metric returns multiple metrics with a different `__type__` or `__unit__` label, but the same `__name__`, users see a warning in the UI.

> Users don't see the `__type__` or `__unit__` labels in the Prometheus UI next to other labels, but the unit displayed next to the value.

Author: I'm not familiar with the TSDB API.  Can you link to it?

> Users see no difference to exposition formats.

Author: For (2), Since we allow relabeling `__name__` and other similar (e.g. `__address__`) labels, it seems good to allow relabeling `__type__` and `__unit__` as well.  It would allow operators to add type or unit information to metrics that don't include it, or fix mistakes.  Added it to the "Prometheus Server Ingestion" section.

Lets discuss (1) in https://github.com/prometheus/proposals/pull/39#discussion_r1856809305

## How

### PromQL Changes

> When a query for a metric returns multiple metrics with a different `__type__` or `__unit__` label, but the same `__name__`, an info annotation will be returned with the PromQL response, which is otherwise unmodified.

Author: Correct.  I'm trying to say that this is "just a warning", and doesn't impact results at all.

### Prometheus UI Changes

When displaying a metric's labels in the table or in the graph views, the UI will hide labels starting with `__` (double underscore) by default, similar to the current handling of `__name__`. A "Show System Labels" check-box will be added, which shows hidden labels when checked.

### Prometheus Server Ingestion

> When receiving OTLP or PRW 2.0, or when scraping the text, OM, or proto formats, the type and unit of the metric are added as the `__type__` and `__unit__` labels, if not already present.

Author: I was thinking about what would be on the `/federate` endpoint if the Prometheus server scraped conflicting metrics from applications. Our choices are:

1. [current] Only `#UNIT` metadata, and no `__unit__` labels.
2. Only `__unit__` labels, and no `#UNIT` metadata.
3. [proposal] Mixed `__unit__` labels, and a `#UNIT` with one of the units the metric has.

* 1 will result in collisions, but maybe that is acceptable for the `/federate` endpoint.  It isn't a regression from what we have today.
* 2 works, but would be breaking for existing users that are consuming `#UNIT`.
* 3 is confusing because of the mixing, but I wanted to leave that open as an option.

I'm OK with disallowing mixing `__unit__` and `#UNIT`, since we could relax that in the future if needed.

> When receiving OTLP or PRW 2.0, or when scraping the text, OM, or proto formats, the type and unit of the metric are added as the `__type__` and `__unit__` labels, if not already present.

Reviewer: We discussed offline, and:

1. would epic to follow 1 and allow multiple the same named metric for different types and units in OM, let's try proposing that, it would help massively with exporters and federate
2. type and unit from metadata is primary (in case of mix)
3. Should we allow __type__ and __unit__ at all in exposition, SHOULD NOT maybe?

> When receiving OTLP or PRW 2.0, or when scraping the text, OM, or proto formats, the type and unit of the metric are added as the `__type__` and `__unit__` labels, if not already present.

Reviewer 2: I'm not too fond of adding __unit__ and __type__ as labels in the exposition format. I think they should stay as a single line at the top of the metric family like it is today.

The Unit/Type will be the same for all time series in a metric family. If they become labels in the exposition format, it will just be repeated information for all time series. It increases the payload, and we waste CPU time parsing it.

> When receiving OTLP or PRW 2.0, or when scraping the text, OM, or proto formats, the type and unit of the metric are added as the `__type__` and `__unit__` labels, if not already present.

Reviewer 3: We have "Users see no difference to exposition formats." stated above, but if you put the type and especially the unit in the `# UNIT` part then you need them in the metric name as well, defeating the purpose. You're other option is to put them into the series on each line.

Looking at /metrics is for humans and follows what you see is what you get in terms of showing what you can query - implying that if you can query by `__type__` or the API/UI returns the `__type__` then you should put them on each line.

And the implication of that is that there needs to be at least one more efficient exposition format that is not so verbose for machines to read.

So I'm not sure this would work without either putting the new labels on every line or modifying OpenMetrics.

> When receiving OTLP or PRW 2.0, or when scraping the text, OM, or proto formats, the type and unit of the metric are added as the `__type__` and `__unit__` labels, if not already present.

Reviewer 3: Of course the above argument doesn't stand if we follow @beorn7 's advice and not show `__type__`, `__unit__` on the query API (`/query` , `/query_range`) , although I would love to have it on the metadata queries endpoint like (`/series`) for Grafana to be able to know what's a float series and what's a native histogram.

> When receiving OTLP or PRW 2.0, or when scraping the text, OM, or proto formats, the type and unit of the metric are added as the `__type__` and `__unit__` labels, if not already present.

Reviewer 4: I think we should show `__type__` and `__unit__` in the query APIs. I'm just saying, in the zeroth step, we should remove those labels in PromQL operations (like the name is removed).

> When receiving OTLP or PRW 2.0, or when scraping the text, OM, or proto formats, the type and unit of the metric are added as the `__type__` and `__unit__` labels, if not already present.

Reviewer 2: I agree with showing `__type__` and `__unit__` in query APIs, just like we show `__name__`.

> We have "Users see no difference to exposition formats." stated above, but if you put the type and especially the unit in the # UNIT part then you need them in the metric name as well, defeating the purpose. You're other option is to put them into the series on each line.

That's a really good catch! This is something we'll probably need to tackle with OM 2.0. Is this what you had in mind with this issue @bwplotka https://github.com/prometheus/OpenMetrics/issues/280?

> When receiving OTLP or PRW 2.0, or when scraping the text, OM, or proto formats, the type and unit of the metric are added as the `__type__` and `__unit__` labels, if not already present.

Author: By "Users see no difference to exposition formats", I meant that this proposal does not change how metrics are currently exposed in exposition formats.  I'll leave that for follow-up discussions in https://github.com/prometheus/OpenMetrics/issues/280 and elsewhere. I updated the language in https://github.com/prometheus/proposals/pull/39/commits/0a545c8488c99eaa83ae6a44df9636896c71753c.

I am open to ways of querying for type and unit that align better with the existing #TYPE and #UNIT comments, if we want to preserve the "what you see is what you get" experience of Prometheus.  We do support querying for `__name__`, so there is at least some precedence.

For example:

* `my_metric{}` returns all series with any type or unit, including `__type__` and `__unit__` labels.
* `my_metric{__unit__="seconds", __type__="counter"}` returns only series with the specified type and unit.

When a query for a metric returns multiple metrics with a different `__type__` or `__unit__` label, but the same `__name__`, users see a warning in the UI.

Users don't see the `__type__` or `__unit__` labels in the Prometheus UI next to other labels, but the unit displayed next to the value.

Users see no difference to exposition formats.

## How

### PromQL Changes

When a query for a metric returns multiple metrics with a different `__type__` or `__unit__` label, but the same `__name__`, a warning annotation will be returned with the PromQL response.

### Prometheus UI Changes

When displaying a metric's labels in the table or in the graph views, the UI will hide the `__type__` and `__unit__` labels, similar to the current handling of `__name__`. If present, the `__unit__` label will be displayed to the right of the value of the metric: e.g. "1.25 seconds". The type will not be displayed.

### Prometheus Server Ingestion

> When receiving OTLP or PRW 2.0, or when scraping the text, OM, or proto formats, the type and unit of the metric are added as the `__type__` and `__unit__` labels, if not already present.

Reviewer 2: Resolving, the Alternatives section made it clear

For example:

* Querying for foo/histogram would return results that include both foo.seconds/histogram and foo.milliseconds/histogram.
* Querying for foo.seconds would return results that include both foo.seconds/histogram and foo.seconds/counter.
* Querying for http_server_duration would return results that include both foo.seconds/histogram and foo.milliseconds/counter.
* Querying for an OpenTelemetry metric, such as http.server.duration, with suffixes would require querying for ”http.server.duration”.seconds/histogram. Note that suffixes are outside of quotes.

This solution is not chosen because:

* Requires PromQL changes (intrusive), touches on “dot” operator ideas.
* Adding suffixes outside of quotes looks strange: {“http.server.duration”.seconds/histogram}
* Rolling this out would be breaking for existing Prometheus users: E.g. {foo_seconds} becomes {foo.seconds/histogram}. Could this be part of OM 2.0?
  * Mitigation: users just stay with {foo_seconds.seconds/histogram}
* Users might be surprised by, or dislike the additional suffixes and delimiters in the metric name results
  * Mitigation: Opt-in for query engines?

> ### "Hide" __type__ and __unit__ labels in PromQL, instead of UI

Author: I'm definitely open to this alternative.  I like having the option of showing `__type__` and `__unit__` in the UI, but if it has to wait for Prom 4.0 because it is breaking, that seems like a significant downside.

> ### "Hide" __type__ and __unit__ labels in PromQL, instead of UI

Reviewer: Well, it could be also merge of both, where PromQL only returns those labels based on something e.g. on conflict or when type or unit is selectors. 

The downside is that we now have to really deeply design groupings and joins.. should they use those labels or not. With the current proposal the answer is trivial and straightforward. This helps with creating alerts and recording rules etc

I think I would be keen to try the current approach e.g. behind feature flag and see who will use it and how to tell more. cc @juliusv @roidelapluie WDYT from UX point of view for non-UI things?

Existing UIs don't handle the `__type__` and `__unit__` labels. To mitigate this, PromQL could omit the `__type__` and `__unit__` labels from the query response. Doing this would avoid requiring UIs to update to handle the new labels.

This solution is not chosen because:

* It deviates from the current handling of the `__name__` label.
* We expect metadata, like type and unit to be useful to display in the UI, and want to enable these use-cases.
* It should be a small amount of effort to hide these labels.

## Potential Future Extensions

### __type__ and __unit__ from client libraries

One obvious extension of this proposal would be for Prometheus clients to start sending `__type__` and `__unit__` labels with the exposition format. This would:

* Allow mixing metrics with the same name, but different types and units in the same endpoint (an explicit non-goal of this proposal).

> * Allow sending unit metadata in the text exposition format, which doesn't support `# UNIT` metadata.

Reviewer 2: Would it be a lot easier to just add `# UNIT` as proposed by OpenMetrics? 🤔

Author: removed.

This is excluded from this proposal because:

* OpenTelemetry users can use [Views](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/metrics/sdk/#view) to resolve collisions. That should be "good enough".
* Doing this would require some changes to client libraries, which is significantly more work, and is harder to experiment with.

> * There can be conflicts between `# TYPE` and `# UNIT` metadata for a metric, and `__type__` and `__unit__` labels. This adds complexity to understanding the exposition format, and requires establishing rules for dealing with conflicts.

Reviewer 2: Good point!

### Pitfalls of the current solution

Roughly half of OpenTelemetry users surveyed preferred keeping metric names unmodified when translating to Prometheus. With our goal of being the default choice to store OpenTelemetry metrics, we should find a way to preserve metric names without introducing potential issues for users.

## Goals

Goals and use cases for the solution as proposed in [How](#how):

* [Required] OpenTelemetry users can query for the original names of their metrics.
* [Required] Users can filter by the metric type or unit in PromQL queries.

> * [Required] PromQL returns a warning when querying across metrics with different units or types.

Reviewer 2: I'd say that a happy side effect of the proposal, but not a requirement :)

> * [Required] PromQL returns a warning when querying across metrics with different units or types.

Author: Warning about inappropriate operations sgtm.  Added to goals.

In the context of preventing collisions from happening in the first place, i've been thinking about what best practices should be. If users write queries and always include __unit__ and __type__ filters in queries, it is impossible for mismatch to happen in the first place. It also makes queries more readable, as you can easily tell the type and unit of the metric when reading a query.  But it does seem quite verbose, and I'm pessimistic that users would actually do this if we tell them they should.

* Prometheus will not attempt to auto-convert between units when there is a conflict.
* Prometheus will not attempt to auto-convert between types (e.g. native histogram vs float series).
* Prometheus client libraries will not allow mixing metrics with the same name, but different type or unit in the exposition format. See potential future extensions.

## User Experience

When querying for a metric, users can filter for a type or unit by specifying a filter on the `__unit__` or `__type__` labels, which use the reserved `__` prefix to ensure they do not collide with user-provided labels.

For example:

* `my_metric{}` returns all series with any type or unit, including `__type__` and `__unit__` labels.
* `my_metric{__unit__="seconds", __type__="counter"}` returns only series with the specified type and unit.

When a query for a metric returns multiple metrics with a different `__type__` or `__unit__` label, but the same `__name__`, users see a warning in the UI.

Users don't see the `__type__` or `__unit__` labels in the Prometheus UI next to other labels, but the unit displayed next to the value.

Users see no difference to exposition formats.

## How

### PromQL Changes

> When a query for a metric returns multiple metrics with a different `__type__` or `__unit__` label, but the same `__name__`, a warning annotation will be returned with the PromQL response.

Author: Yes, full results are returned by PromQL.  I've clarified this in the paragraph.

Updated from a warning to an info.

### Prometheus UI Changes

When displaying a metric's labels in the table or in the graph views, the UI will hide labels starting with `__` (double underscore) by default, similar to the current handling of `__name__`. A "Show System Labels" check-box will be added, which shows hidden labels when checked.

### Prometheus Server Ingestion

When receiving OTLP or PRW 2.0, or when scraping the text, OM, or proto formats, the type and unit of the metric are added as the `__type__` and `__unit__` labels, if not already present.

PRW 1.0 is omitted because metadata is sent separately from timeseries, making it infeasible to add the labels at ingestion time.

### Implementation Plan

#### Milestone 1: Feature flag for adding labels

> Add a feature flag: `--enable-feature=metadata-labels`. When enabled `__type__` and `__unit__` labels are added when receiving OTLP or PRW 2.0, or when scraping the text, OM, or proto formats.

Reviewer 2: `identifying-type-and-unit`?

> Add a feature flag: `--enable-feature=metadata-labels`. When enabled `__type__` and `__unit__` labels are added when receiving OTLP or PRW 2.0, or when scraping the text, OM, or proto formats.

Author: renamed to identifying-type-and-unit

#### Milestone 2: UI and PromQL changes

During this stage, implement the UI and PromQL changes above. Iterate based on feedback. Changes should have no effect unless the metadata-labels feature flag is enabled.

#### Milestone 3: Add NoNameChanges option for OTLP translation

Add an option, `NoNameChanges` for the OTLP translation strategy. When enabled, it disables UTF-8 sanitization and the addition of suffixes. In the documentation for this option, recommend that `--enable-feature=metadata-labels` is enabled.

## Alternatives

> ### “Real” Type and Unit suffixes in **name**

Author: added as an alternative.

## Potential Future Extensions

### __type__ and __unit__ from client libraries

One obvious extension of this proposal would be for Prometheus clients to start sending `__type__` and `__unit__` labels with the exposition format. This would:

* Allow mixing metrics with the same name, but different types and units in the same endpoint (an explicit non-goal of this proposal).
* Allow sending unit metadata in the text exposition format, which doesn't support `# UNIT` metadata.
    * Counter-point: It would be easier to add `# UNIT` metadata to the text exposition format.

This is excluded from this proposal because:

* OpenTelemetry users can use [Views](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/metrics/sdk/#view) to resolve collisions. That should be "good enough".
* Doing this would require some changes to client libraries, which is significantly more work, and is harder to experiment with.
* There can be conflicts between `# TYPE` and `# UNIT` metadata for a metric, and `__type__` and `__unit__` labels. This adds complexity to understanding the exposition format, and requires establishing rules for dealing with conflicts.

> ### More metadata labels

Reviewer 2: Unfortunately OTel resource attributes are all considered identifying today (correct me if I'm wrong David). 

There is work in progress to replace resource attributes with a new thing called `Entity`. Entity will be able to distinguish, using otel lingo, `Identifying` from `Descriptive` attributes, but this will take some years to get popular in the industry

> ### More metadata labels

Author: OTel resource attributes are all considered identifying today, but we don't treat them all as identifying when translating from OTel -> Prometheus.  Instead, we just treat service.name + service.instance.id + service.namespace as identifying.  That is correct _if_ the OTLP originates from an OTel-instrumented application, but not if it wasn't (e.g. comes from an otel collector receiver).

Anyways, what I had in mind was more things that users don't think of as "labels", like schema url, or maybe scope name + version.  I think resource attributes make sense as "real" labels, rather than metadata.

* [Required] Users can filter by the metric type or unit in PromQL queries.
* [Required] PromQL returns a warning when querying across metrics with different units or types, or when using "inappropriate" operations for a metric type.
* [Nice to have] OpenTelemetry users can grep for the original names in the text exposition.

### Audience

This document is for Prometheus server maintainers, PromQL maintainers, and anyone interested in furthering compatibility between Prometheus and OpenTelemetry.

## Non-Goals

* Prometheus will not attempt to auto-convert between units when there is a conflict.
* Prometheus will not attempt to auto-convert between types (e.g. native histogram vs float series).
* Prometheus client libraries will not allow mixing metrics with the same name, but different type or unit in the exposition format. See potential future extensions.

## User Experience

When querying for a metric, users can filter for a type or unit by specifying a filter on the `__unit__` or `__type__` labels, which use the reserved `__` prefix to ensure they do not collide with user-provided labels.

For example:

> * `my_metric{}` returns all series with any type or unit, including `__type__` and `__unit__` labels.

Reviewer 3: On the API I assume?

Author: Yes.  Clarified in https://github.com/prometheus/proposals/pull/39/commits/94796fb95b093adff592afdd940a12cd66edeca2

> * `my_metric{__unit__="seconds", __type__="counter"}` returns only series with the specified type and unit.

Reviewer 3: Both API and UI I assume?

Author: Yes.  Clarified in https://github.com/prometheus/proposals/pull/39/commits/94796fb95b093adff592afdd940a12cd66edeca2

Users can modify the type and unit of a metric at ingestion time by using `metric_relabel_configs`, and relabeling the `__type__` and `__unit__` labels.

### Implementation Plan

#### Milestone 1: Feature flag for adding labels

Add a feature flag: `--enable-feature=identifying-type-and-unit`. When enabled, `__type__` and `__unit__` labels are added when receiving OTLP or PRW 2.0, or when scraping the text, OM, or proto formats. Implement any changes required to allow relabeling `__type__` and `__unit__` in `metric_relabel_configs`.

#### Milestone 2: UI and PromQL changes

During this stage, implement the UI and PromQL changes above. Iterate based on feedback. Changes should have no effect unless the identifying-type-and-unit feature flag is enabled.

#### Milestone 3: Add NoNameChanges option for OTLP translation

Add an option, `NoNameChanges` for the OTLP translation strategy. When enabled, it disables UTF-8 sanitization and the addition of suffixes. In the documentation for this option, recommend that `--enable-feature=identifying-type-and-unit` is enabled.

## Alternatives

> ### “Real” Type and Unit suffixes in **name**

Reviewer 4: To view this alternative from a different perspective:

We could see it as "syntactic sugar":

`http_request_duration{__unit__="seconds", __type__="histogram"}` would be just another syntax for `http_request_duration~seconds.histogram`. (Order is arbitrary, and both are optional. Could be `http_request_duration.histogram~seconds` or `http_request_duration.histogram` or `http_request_duration~seconds`.)

This would be fully compatible with this proposal. It would make it much easier to add units and/or types to the metric name, so it would address the concern that you cannot see the unit and type anymore by looking at a PromQL expression without supporting tooling. If we allowed `.total` as an alias of `.counter`, we would have very little visible change. `http_requests_total` would become `http_requests.total`.

Author: updated the alternative to include these points.

Similar to suffixes of _<unit> and _<type/total> but make it an explicit suffix using a delimiter not currently permitted in metric names. Specifying suffixes is optional when querying for a metric. When the type or unit suffix is omitted from a query, it would (design TBD) return results which include any type or unit suffix which exists for that name.

> NOTE: Dot for units and slash for type is just one example, there might be better operators/characters to use.

Reviewer 4: `/` would be tough because it is already an operator. But there are many more characters to choose from, maybe `~` would work – and I would use `.` for the type and `~` for the unit: `http_request_duration~seconds.histogram`

Author: Updated in https://github.com/prometheus/proposals/pull/39/commits/dec6f78505806db85dbe886a26a98ae8520f5df8.

Writing queries that include the type and unit would be recommended as a best-practice by the community.

For example:

* Querying for foo/histogram would return results that include both foo.seconds/histogram and foo.milliseconds/histogram.
* Querying for foo.seconds would return results that include both foo.seconds/histogram and foo.seconds/counter.
* Querying for http_server_duration would return results that include both foo.seconds/histogram and foo.milliseconds/counter.
* Querying for an OpenTelemetry metric, such as http.server.duration, with suffixes would require querying for ”http.server.duration”.seconds/histogram. Note that suffixes are outside of quotes.

This solution is not chosen because:

> * Requires PromQL changes (intrusive), touches on “dot” operator ideas.

Reviewer 4: In fact, using a real `.` operator to separate something like the type _is_ one of the ideas the `.` was reserved for. So it's more a pro than a con. :)

Reviewer 5: If we keep reserving the dot for the future, we'll never use it. If the dot is useful here, let's take advantage

Reviewer 5: OR, we could decide we never really need the dot and we can officially add it to the blessed-character list, and then people can avoid the quoting syntax just for dots! I actually think that's an acceptable solution as well

Author: Removed from downsides.

> * Adding suffixes outside of quotes looks strange: {“http.server.duration”.seconds/histogram}

Reviewer 4: I would apply those operators outside of the braces anyway `{"http.server.duration"}~seconds.histogram`. Looks less strange IMHO. (For conventional names, it could also follow the name before (but still outside) the braces: `http_server_duration~seconds.histogram{job="foobar"}` or `http_server_duration{job="foobar"}~seconds.histogram`

Reviewer 5: I also don't mind putting the unit/type outside of the braces.  I could also see some syntax with other gathering operators like:

`foo{bar="baz"}(seconds,histogram)` or `foo{bar="baz"}{seconds,histogram}`

but that is not very pretty

> * Rolling this out would be breaking for existing Prometheus users: E.g. {foo_seconds} becomes {foo.seconds/histogram}. Could this be part of OM 2.0?

Reviewer 4: That's the same breakage you get if you switch from the current name mangling to "please keep OTel names as is" mode, isn't it?

Author: Clarified that this may be breaking depending on how it is introduced.

## Type and Unit Metadata Labels

* **Owners:**
  * David Ashpole [@dashpole](https://github.com/dashpole)

* **Implementation Status:** `Not implemented`

* **Related Issues and PRs:**
  * https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/2497

* **Other docs or links:**
  * Survey Results: https://opentelemetry.io/blog/2024/prometheus-compatibility-survey/
  * Slack thread: https://cloud-native.slack.com/archives/C01AUBA4PFE/p1726399373207819
  * Doc with Options: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1t4ARkyOoI4lLNdKb0ixbUz7k7Mv_eCiq7sRKHAGZ9vg
  * Prometheus PoC: https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/compare/main...dashpole:prometheus:type_and_unit_labels

This document proposes adding the metric type and unit as labels on metrics.

## Why

> Per [dev-summit consensus](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1uurQCi5iVufhYHGlBZ8mJMK_freDFKPG0iYBQqJ9fvA/edit#bookmark=id.q6upqm7itl24), we would like to avoid adding type and unit suffixes to metric names when translating from OpenTelemetry to Prometheus. These suffixes are currently required by the [compatibility specification](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/compatibility/prometheus_and_openmetrics.md). However, OpenTelemetry currently considers the metric type and unit identifying, whereas Prometheus does not. Simply removing suffixes might result in "collisions" between distinct OpenTelemetry metrics which have the same name, but different types (less commonly) or units. Additionally, it is possible in Prometheus to metrics with the same name, but different value types (float64 vs native histogram).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Per [dev-summit consensus](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1uurQCi5iVufhYHGlBZ8mJMK_freDFKPG0iYBQqJ9fvA/edit#bookmark=id.q6upqm7itl24), we would like to avoid adding type and unit suffixes to metric names when translating from OpenTelemetry to Prometheus. These suffixes are currently required by the [compatibility specification](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/compatibility/prometheus_and_openmetrics.md). However, OpenTelemetry currently considers the metric type and unit identifying, whereas Prometheus does not. Simply removing suffixes might result in "collisions" between distinct OpenTelemetry metrics which have the same name, but different types (less commonly) or units. Additionally, it is possible in Prometheus to have metrics with the same name, but different value types (float64 vs native histogram).
```

* Prometheus will not attempt to auto-convert between types (e.g. native histogram vs float series).
* Prometheus client libraries will not allow mixing metrics with the same name, but different type or unit in the exposition format. See potential future extensions.

## User Experience

When querying for a metric, users can filter for a type or unit by specifying a filter on the `__unit__` or `__type__` labels, which use the reserved `__` prefix to ensure they do not collide with user-provided labels.

For example, querying the query API for:

* `my_metric{}` returns all series with any type or unit, including `__type__` and `__unit__` labels.
* `my_metric{__unit__="seconds", __type__="counter"}` returns only series with the specified type and unit.

When a query for a metric returns multiple metrics with a different `__type__` or `__unit__` label, but the same `__name__`, the query returns an info annotation, which is surfaced to the user in the UI.

Users don't see the `__type__` or `__unit__` labels in the Prometheus UI next to other labels by default.

Users see no change to exposition formats as a result of this proposal.

## How

### PromQL Changes

> When a query for a metric returns multiple metrics with a different `__type__` or `__unit__` label, but the same `__name__`, an info annotation will be returned with the PromQL response, which is otherwise unmodified.

Reviewer 7: > When a query for a metric returns multiple metrics with a different `__type__` or `__unit__` label

The `__type__` and `__unit__` labels will be set for every series. I expect that adding `{__type__="xxx"}` or `{__unit__="yyy"}` to label matchers in queries will have a significant impact on query performance (and TCO) when running at scale, due to the extra load on TSDB index lookup. Due to how postings lookup and intersection works when querying the index, every `__type__` or `__unit__` lookup will be a very high cardinality one.

I think this is the biggest con of this proposal. I think that, along with this proposal, we should adopt some index lookup optimizations to counterbalance the negative impact of adding `__type__` or `__unit__` label matchers to vector selectors in the queries.

An idea could be adopting a strategy similar to Mimir store-gateways, where we estimate the cardinality of each label matcher before looking up the actual postings. If the cardinality is order of magnitude higher than other label matchers cardinality, then we don't lookup the postings for the high cardinality matchers at all, but apply these matchers in a 2nd stage, during the symbolization of the series matched by the other label matchers that were applied during the index lookup phase. I can share more details about how this work and the performance improvement we've got, if interested.

Reviewer 4: I would assume that queries for type and unit will be rare. (How often do you need to filter for unit or type?)
However, there are many use cases for labels that are set on many if not all series. Imagine something like `env="prod"` vs. `env="dev"`. And those queries will be very commonly queried for. (E.g.: What's the current CPU usage by all prod services?) So my assumption would be that a label set on all metrics is a problem we have to solve anyway, but the pressure to solve it is much more coming from other use cases than the type-and-unit-as-labels one.

Reviewer: This is true disadvantage. I updated the proposal linking to your concern @pracucci . I generally agree we should have a common handling like you mentioned for all cardinal labels but this has potential (on Thanos, Cortex, Mimir scale) to surpass cardinality of even `env=prod`.  I'm not worried about selecting ONLY type and unit (we can disable that **should we do this now in Prometheus (added this question to proposal)?**). 

I am more worried of a general posting size for type=... in larger TSDBs etc (: Like fetching huge list of references to million series even for multiple selectors might give some overhead? 🤔 We might need to double check this.

Reviewer 7: > I'm not worried about selecting ONLY type and unit

Me neither. Agree we can disable that use case.

I'm worried about looking up (and intersecting) the postings when the type or unit matcher is part of vector selector. I've already seen the pain at scale with selectors like `env=prod` and the type/unit matchers could potentially be even worse.

> Aggregations and label matches ignore `__unit__` and `__type__` and any operation removes the `__unit__` and `__type__` label (with the exception of `label_replace`).

Reviewer 4: I would say the treatment should be exactly as `__name__` (to keep things simple and consistent), so early removal by default and delayed removal if delayed removal is enabled. (Which is just "for now" as I think, if the experiment is successful, we should consider a "smart" change of the type label (and maybe even for the unit label, where it makes sense).

### Prometheus UI Changes

When displaying a metric's labels in the table or in the graph views, the UI will hide labels starting with `__` (double underscore) by default, similar to the current handling of `__name__`. A "Show System Labels" check-box will be added, which shows hidden labels when checked.

### Prometheus Server Ingestion

> When receiving OTLP or PRW 2.0, or when scraping the text, OM, or proto formats, the type and unit of the metric are added as the `__type__` and `__unit__` labels, if not already present.

Reviewer 4: Another thought about differentiating native histograms and classic histograms:

As Prometheus doesn't really have a notion of "classic histogram time series", but instead breaks a classic histogram (and a summary) into a number of series, I think these series should have their own distinct types (rather than labeling them all as "histogram" or "summary), which would also remove the dependency on magic suffixes.

More concretely, I propose the following label values for the `__type__` label:

| label value | metric type | original OpenMetrics type | notes |
|----|----|----|---|
| `counter` | counter | Counter | |
| `total` | counter | Counter | alias for `counter` |
| `gauge` | gauge | Gauge | |
| `unknown` | unknown | Unknown | equivalent to a missing/empty `__type__` label |
| `info` | info | Info | would be great if we could somehow mark the data labels and the identifying labels, story for another day… |
| `sum` | sum component of a classic histogram _or_ a summary | Histogram _or_ Summary | this would support a combination of summary and (classic) histogram |
| `count` | count component of a classic histogram _or_ a summary | Histogram _or_ Summary | this would support a combination of summary and (classic) histogram |
| `gsum` | sum component of a classic gauge histogram| GaugeHistogram | |
| `gcount` | count component of a classic gauge histogram | GaugeHistogram |  |
| `quantile` | quantile of a summary | Summary | must have a `quantile` label |
| `bucket` | bucket of a classic histogram | Histogram | must have an `le` label |
| `gbucket` | bucket of a classic gauge histogram | GaugeHistogram | must have an `le` label |
| `histogram` | native counter histogram | Histogram | for any schema (i.e. includes NHCB) |
| `ghistogram` | native gauge histogram | GaugeHistogram |  for any schema (i.e. includes NHCB)  |

I'm currently unsure how Prometheus handles OM's stateset type and left it out. 

About the `total` alias: The idea is to treat `total` and `counter` completely equivalent. If we went for the `.` idea sketched out below, a legacy metric like `http_requests_total` could now be written as `http_requests.total`, and even OTel counters could be addressed by a syntax that almost looks like they got a "total" suffix.

Similarly, we could switch to not attaching _count/_sum/_bucket anymore when ingesting classic histograms or summaries, avoiding the naming collision issue. What was addressed as `request_duration_count` or `request_duration_sum` would now become `request_duration.count` and `request_duration.sum`.

We could even go wild and fall back to retrieving the count and sum from a native histogram if the users specifies `request_duration.count` or `request_duration.sum, but these metrics don't exist directly, while a native histogram `request_duration.histogram` exists.

About the combination of summary and classic histogram: This is something you could already trick into Prometheus by just providing a combination of metrics like `foo{quantile="..."}`, `foo_bucket{le="..."}`, `foo_count`, `foo_sum`. I don't see a reason to forbid it. And I would even say we should support it to not break setups that used that trick.

Reviewer 3: As much as I like these, the one confusing thing would be that we already have "type" as metric family type with less choices. Mentioned [here](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/querying/api/#querying-metric-metadata) , also in exposition formats (e.g. [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/docs/instrumenting/exposition_formats/#comments-help-text-and-type-information), [OM1.0](https://github.com/prometheus/OpenMetrics/blob/main/specification/OpenMetrics.md#type)).

I'm assuming @dashpole just meant to have the OpenMetrics types in the `__type__` label?

Reviewer 4: If we had "native summaries" and then got completely rid of classic histograms and "classic summaries", we could do a perfect mapping, but the existence of the "flattened" classic histograms and "classic summaries" is a deviation from the data model of the exposition formats. Using magic suffixes and label names to mark them was flawed from the beginning. Solving this via appropriate type labels would finally give us a solid solution.

I don't think we need to stick 1:1 to OM v1 types (at least one of which isn't even supported by Prometheus AFAIK), and even less so to a non-formal description of metric types in the docs.

Author: > I'm assuming @dashpole just meant to have the OpenMetrics types in the __type__ label?

Yes, that was my assumption.  I could see an argument for extending this to preserve OTLP types (e.g. updowncounter), but that is a different discussion.

My primary concern with using those "distinct types" is that people being able to use them in queries is an important use-case, and I think requires users to learn the new concept.

Reviewer 4: We can hammer out the precise strings for the type label later, but I would like to point out that the exposition formats do not make a difference between classic and native histograms, while we really want to mark them differently in Prometheus. We already ran into problem with tooling like query editors that cannot  tell if a histogram is native or classic before seeing the actual time series.

Author: Good point.  I'll add addressing collisions between native and classic histograms as an explicit requirement/goal of the proposal.

Reviewer: Sounds like it's resolved, but the type table is super useful 🙃

Reviewer: Mentioned this in the alternative.

Users can modify the type and unit of a metric at ingestion time by using `metric_relabel_configs`, and relabeling the `__type__` and `__unit__` labels.

### Implementation Plan

#### Milestone 1: Feature flag for adding labels

Add a feature flag: `--enable-feature=identifying-type-and-unit`. When enabled, `__type__` and `__unit__` labels are added when receiving OTLP or PRW 2.0, or when scraping the text, OM, or proto formats. Implement any changes required to allow relabeling `__type__` and `__unit__` in `metric_relabel_configs`.

#### Milestone 2: UI and PromQL changes

During this stage, implement the UI and PromQL changes above. Iterate based on feedback. Changes should have no effect unless the identifying-type-and-unit feature flag is enabled.

#### Milestone 3: Add NoNameChanges option for OTLP translation

Add an option, `NoNameChanges` for the OTLP translation strategy. When enabled, it disables UTF-8 sanitization and the addition of suffixes. In the documentation for this option, recommend that `--enable-feature=identifying-type-and-unit` is enabled.

## Alternatives

> ### “Real” Type and Unit suffixes in **name**

Reviewer: This is amazing, just noticed this thanks

Funny how we ended up with similar idea https://docs.google.com/document/d/10Z1XKeQXxJAc_jKW0qEC8G4krlPTmE89k31FJfPVbro/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.1zpzuhp77mpk

I will update my doc to this

> ### “Real” Type and Unit suffixes in **name**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Extension “Real” Type and Unit suffixes in **name**
```

So how I see this.. it's not alternative, it's could be an extension no? Which I would vote to add into main proposal 🙈

Reviewer: But maybe better for dedicated proposal, whatever works.

Reviewer: Mentioned as an extension.

Similar to suffixes of _<unit> and _<type/total> but make it an explicit suffix using a delimiter not currently permitted in metric names. Specifying suffixes is optional when querying for a metric. When the type or unit suffix is omitted from a query, it would (design TBD) return results which include any type or unit suffix which exists for that name.

NOTES:

> * `~` for units and `.` for type is just one example, there might be better operators/characters to use.

Reviewer 4: If we have a fixed set of allowed strings for the `__type__`, we could probably declare them "reserved" and not usable for units. Then we could use the same special separator characters for both type and unit (`http_request_duration.seconds.histogram`, equivalent to `http_request_durations.histogram.seconds`). (Pitfall: If we extend the list of allowed types later, we might hit strings that have been used as units somewhere.)

Reviewer 2: Could we move this part to another proposal? I agree that this is a separate thing from the original proposal here, and getting consensus would delay the work on the label's part 😬

Reviewer 4: On the contrary. An objection against this proposal was that the label syntax is so complicated that people will stop including any hints about the type and unit when they write PromQL. At least mentioning the option of (maybe later) add an easier syntax for type and unit will _expedite_, rather than delay the acceptance of this proposal.

Reviewer: Mentioned so we should be good to unblock this and propose extended PromQL syntax in a separate proposal. Thanks!

Writing queries that include the type and unit would be recommended as a best-practice by the community.

For example:

* Querying for `foo.histogram` would return results that include both `foo~seconds.histogram` and `foo~milliseconds.histogram`.
* Querying for `foo~seconds` would return results that include both `foo~seconds.histogram` and `foo~seconds.counter`.
* Querying for `http_server_duration` would return results that include both `foo~seconds.histogram` and `foo~milliseconds.counter`.
* Querying for an OpenTelemetry metric, such as `http.server.duration`, with suffixes would require querying for `”http.server.duration”~seconds.histogram`. Note that suffixes are outside of quotes.

This solution is not chosen because:

* Adding suffixes outside of quotes looks strange: `{“http.server.duration”~seconds.histogram}`.

>   * Alternatives: `{“http.server.duration”}~seconds.histogram` or `{“http.server.duration”}{seconds,histogram}`

Reviewer 4: I would see `{"http.server.duration"}~seconds.histogram` as the most "obvious" syntax.

Reviewer 2: I think this deserves to go through the hands of UX researchers :) 

I would be very confused to see tildes and dots suddenly in my metric names. I see this as a source of confusion, as there are more things that I need to learn to use Prometheus effectively.

Reviewer 4: The usage is optional, so at least you don't _have_ to learn in to write these.

The problem is that the core of this proposal, namely putting type and unit into labels rather than give hints via naming conventions, also needed to go through the hands of UX researchers. The proposed option is in fact an attempt to address UX concerns.

Reviewer 5: Should we set an explicit non-goal of designing a short syntax for specifying type and unit? that feels like a "nice-to-have" as opposed to a requirement, and it seems non-blocking on the overall work.

Reviewer: I already did that I believe.

Reviewer: Well.. now - I pushed to a wrong branch before https://github.com/prometheus/proposals/pull/39/commits/7b703a6f35a3db26d5a2cd9e2878dbd8d7ada6b8

> * Rolling this out may be breaking for existing Prometheus users: E.g. `{foo_seconds}` becomes either `{foo~seconds.histogram}` or `{foo_seconds~seconds.histogram}`. Could this be part of OM 2.0?

Reviewer 4: I wouldn't see this as an argument specifically about this syntax. You could also say that with the original proposal, `foo_seconds` becomes `foo{__unit__="seconds", __type__="histogram"`}.

Or in other words: If the original metric has unit and/or type in its name, we wouldn't need to change the name, but could still add the labels. (i.e. what's written below as mitigation).

>   * Mitigation: users just stay with `{foo_seconds~seconds.histogram}`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  * Mitigation: users just stay with `foo_seconds~seconds.histogram`
```

* Users might be surprised by, or dislike the additional suffixes and delimiters in the metric name results

>   * Mitigation: Opt-in for query engines?

Reviewer 4: The additional suffixes don't have to be used, unless you need to resolve an ambiguity _or_ you miss the old-style suffixes. This solution is mostly meant for the latter. And in the case of ambiguity, it is still simpler than writing the verbose label syntax.

* Allow mixing metrics with the same name, but different type or unit in the exposition format. See potential future extensions.
* Design special PromQL syntax for type and unit in this proposal.

## How

We propose adding special `__unit__` and `__type__` labels that combined with `__name__` metric name compose a "metric identity". Initially behind a `type-and-unit-labels` feature flag, but opt-out once stable.

When querying for a metric, users will be able to filter for a type or unit by specifying a filter on the `__unit__` or `__type__` labels, which use the reserved `__` prefix to ensure they do not collide with user-provided labels. Those labels will be populated on ingestion (scrape, PRW/OTLP receiving) from the existing metadata fields (e.g. TYPE text field in text exposition). **Any existing user provided labels for `__unit__` and `__type__` will be overridden or dropped**.

For example, querying the query API for:

* `my_metric{}` will return all series with any type or unit, including `__type__` and `__unit__` labels.
* `my_metric{__unit__="seconds", __type__="counter"}` will return only series with the specified type and unit.

> In the future, we can come with extensions to [PromQL with nicer syntax e.g. `my_metric~seconds.counter`]().

Reviewer: I will keep it, but make sure it's visibly mentioned as NOT approved and planned for now.

When a query for a metric returns multiple metrics with a different `__type__` or `__unit__` label, but the same `__name__`, the query returns an info annotation, which is surfaced to the user in the UI.

Users don't see the `__type__` or `__unit__` labels in the Prometheus UI next to other labels by default.

> When a query will drop metric name in a effect of an operation or function `__type__` and `__unit__` will be also dropped.

Reviewer 2: Changing word ordering is not a big deal, but the missing coma made me have a hard time understanding the sentence 😬

### Prometheus UI Changes

When displaying a metric's labels in the table or in the graph views, the UI will hide labels starting with `__` (double underscore) by default, similar to the current handling of `__name__`. A "Show System Labels" check-box will be added, which shows hidden labels when checked.

### Prometheus Server Ingestion

When receiving OTLP or PRW 2.0, or when scraping the text, OM, or proto formats, the type and unit of the metric are added as the `__type__` and `__unit__` labels. For simplicity, any existing user provided labels for `__unit__` and `__type__` will be overridden or dropped. Typeless (including unknown type), nameless and unitless entries will NOT produce any label.

PRW 1.0 is omitted because metadata is sent separately from timeseries, making it infeasible to add the labels at ingestion time.

Users can modify the type and unit of a metric at ingestion time by using `metric_relabel_configs`, and relabeling the `__type__` and `__unit__` labels.

### Considerations

This solution solves all goals mentioned in [Goals](#goals). It also comes with certain disadvantages:

> * As [@pracucci mentioned](https://github.com/prometheus/proposals/pull/39/files#r19428174750), this change will technically allow users query for "all" counters or "all" seconds with units which will likely pose DoS/cost for operators, long term storage systems and vendors. Given existing TSDB indexing, `__type__` and `__unit__` postings will have extreme amount of series referenced. More work **has to be done to detect, handle or even forbid such selectors, on their own.**. On top of that TSDB posting index size will increase too. This is however similar to any popular labels like `env=prod`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* As [@pracucci mentioned](https://github.com/prometheus/proposals/pull/39/files#r19428174750), this change will technically allow users to query for "all" counters or "all" metrics with units which will likely pose DoS/cost for operators, long term storage systems and vendors. Given existing TSDB indexing, `__type__` and `__unit__` postings will have extreme amount of series referenced. More work **has to be done to detect, handle or even forbid such selectors, on their own.**. On top of that TSDB posting index size will increase too. This is however similar to any popular labels like `env=prod`.
```

## Alternatives

### Type and Unit in complex value types

Unlike other metric types, native histograms are a complex type and contain many fields in a single value. The metric type and unit could be added as fields of a complex value type in a similar way.

This solution is not chosen because:

* Requires intrusive changes to all formats (text, proto, etc.).
* Requires new PromQL syntax for querying the type and unit.

### "Hide" __type__ and __unit__ labels in PromQL, instead of UI

Existing UIs don't handle the `__type__` and `__unit__` labels. To mitigate this, PromQL could omit the `__type__` and `__unit__` labels from the query response. Doing this would avoid requiring UIs to update to handle the new labels.

This solution is not chosen because:

* It deviates from the current handling of the `__name__` label.
* We expect metadata, like type and unit to be useful to display in the UI, and want to enable these use-cases.
* It should be a small amount of effort to hide these labels.

> ### Omit __unit__ label from counting series for summaries and histograms

Reviewer 8: I'm a bit confused by this section - I'm unsure what the chosen proposal is vs the rejected alternatives, mostly because I don't see a histogram unit proposal within the How section to correlate with this. My assumption is that the proposal is "The unit of a `_count` or `_bucket` series of a histogram is always `1`" and the rest is the alternatives - is that correct?

Reviewer: Made this more clear.

* Querying for `foo~seconds` would return results that include both `foo~seconds.histogram` and `foo~seconds.counter`.
* Querying for `http_server_duration` would return results that include both `foo~seconds.histogram` and `foo~milliseconds.counter`.
* Querying for an OpenTelemetry metric, such as `http.server.duration`, with suffixes would require querying for `”http.server.duration”~seconds.histogram`. Note that suffixes are outside of quotes.

This solution is not chosen because:

* Adding suffixes outside of quotes looks strange: `{“http.server.duration”~seconds.histogram}`.
  * Alternatives: `{“http.server.duration”}~seconds.histogram` or `{“http.server.duration”}{seconds,histogram}`
* Rolling this out may be breaking for existing Prometheus users: E.g. `foo_seconds` becomes either `foo~seconds.histogram` or `foo_seconds~seconds.histogram`. Could this be part of OM 2.0?
  * Mitigation: users just stay with `foo_seconds~seconds.histogram`
* Users might be surprised by, or dislike the additional suffixes and delimiters in the metric name results
  * Mitigation: Opt-in for query engines?

### Handle __type__ and __unit__ in PromQL operations

> Initially, aggregations and label matches will ignore `__unit__` and `__type__` and all PromQL operations remove the `__unit__` and `__type__` label (with the exception of `label_replace`). Over time, we can update each function to keep these labels by implementing the appropriate logic.  For example, adding two gauges together should yeild a gauge.

Reviewer 2: Rating over a counter should result in a gauge as well, for example. Good idea to work on this in a future step, and I think we'll need this work :)

> Initially, aggregations and label matches will ignore `__unit__` and `__type__` and all PromQL operations remove the `__unit__` and `__type__` label (with the exception of `label_replace`). Over time, we can update each function to keep these labels by implementing the appropriate logic.  For example, adding two gauges together should yeild a gauge.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Initially, aggregations and label matches will ignore `__unit__` and `__type__` and all PromQL operations remove the `__unit__` and `__type__` label (with the exception of `label_replace`). Over time, we can update each function to keep these labels by implementing the appropriate logic.  For example, adding two gauges together should yield a gauge.
```

    * (second) https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/pull/16025
  * Vision docs: 

> TL;DR: This document proposes extending metric identity to include the metric type and unit as separate labels.

## Why

Prometheus naming convention and OpenMetrics 1.0 recommend encoding metric unit as a metric name suffix. For counters, conventions recommend adding `_total` suffix. This technique was incredible useful for humans to know semantics of their metrics when using Prometheus metrics (e.g. PromQL in alerts, dashboards, adhoc queries, in plain YAML form). However, these days we are hitting two main limitations of this solution:

1. Inability for automation to reliably parse unit and type from the metric name. For example, you never know for sure if unit (e.g. `bytes`) is part of metric name or unit. For the metric type we saw accidents of naming counters without total or vice versa. The `_total` only helps with counters too, we have more metric types. This logic is preventing various innovations and features (e.g. Type-aware PromQL, seamless renames, smarter tool for metric analysis and processing, e.g. GenAI).

> 2. Significant increase of the cases for series with the same metric name but different unit and type. For example, it is possible in Prometheus to have metrics with the same name, but different value types (float64 vs native histogram). Additionally with OpenTelemetry metrics, per [dev-summit consensus](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1uurQCi5iVufhYHGlBZ8mJMK_freDFKPG0iYBQqJ9fvA/edit#bookmark=id.q6upqm7itl24), we would like to avoid adding type and unit suffixes to metric names when translating from OpenTelemetry to Prometheus. Simply removing suffixes might result in "collisions" between distinct OpenTelemetry metrics which have the same name, but different types (less commonly) or units.

Reviewer: Fair, updated with common example, thanks!

  * Blocker for [delta type](https://docs.google.com/document/d/15ujTAWK11xXP3D-EuqEWTsxWiAlbBQ5NSMloFyF93Ug/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.5sybau7waq2q).
* [Required] OpenTelemetry users can query for the original names of their metrics.
* [Nice to have] Path for the further innovations around metric identity (e.g. [seamless renames](https://www.google.com/url?q=https://sched.co/1txHv&sa=D&source=docs&ust=1742288864071431&usg=AOvVaw06J0dGuqUNJPPPNF17Eeg8))
* [Nice to have] Improve PromQL UX that errors/warns when using "inappropriate" operations for a metric type.
* [Nice to have] OpenTelemetry users can grep for the original names in the text exposition.

### Audience

This document is for Prometheus server maintainers, PromQL maintainers, and anyone interested in furthering compatibility between Prometheus and OpenTelemetry.

## Non-Goals

* Propose auto-convert between units when there is a conflict.
* Propose auto-convert between types (e.g. native histogram vs float series).
* Allow mixing metrics with the same name, but different type or unit in the exposition format. See potential future extensions.
* Design special PromQL syntax for type and unit in this proposal.

## How

> We propose adding special `__unit__` and `__type__` labels that combined with `__name__` metric name compose a "metric identity". Initially behind a `type-and-unit-labels` feature flag, but opt-out once stable. Type and unit values are defined by the exposition and ingestion formats. We propose the initial PromQL handling of various type and unit to be initially tied to [OpenMetrics 1.0 types](https://prometheus.io/docs/specs/om/open_metrics_spec/#metric-types) and subject to a future breaking change (tackled in [a different proposal](#more-strict-unit-and-type-value-definition)).

Reviewer: I updated wording to `Metric Family Identity` so far.

> We propose adding special `__unit__` and `__type__` labels that combined with `__name__` metric name compose a "metric identity". Initially behind a `type-and-unit-labels` feature flag, but opt-out once stable. Type and unit values are defined by the exposition and ingestion formats. We propose the initial PromQL handling of various type and unit to be initially tied to [OpenMetrics 1.0 types](https://prometheus.io/docs/specs/om/open_metrics_spec/#metric-types) and subject to a future breaking change (tackled in [a different proposal](#more-strict-unit-and-type-value-definition)).

Reviewer 2: +1 for MetricFamilyIdentity. It's also aligned with our intended changes for OM 2.0

Users should see no change to the current exposition formats as a result of this proposal.

### Complex metrics without native type e.g. classic Histogram and Summary

Given this proposal adds a type and unit dimension to every single series, we propose all the series of a single classic histograms and summaries "metric family", should use the same unit and type.
 
For example:

```
# TYPE foo histogram
# UNIT foo seconds  
foo_bucket{le="0.0"} 0
foo_bucket{le="1e-05"} 0
foo_bucket{le="0.0001"} 5
foo_bucket{le="0.1"} 8
foo_bucket{le="1.0"} 10
foo_bucket{le="10.0"} 11
foo_bucket{le="100000.0"} 11
foo_bucket{le="1e+06"} 15
foo_bucket{le="1e+23"} 16
foo_bucket{le="1.1e+23"} 17
foo_bucket{le="+Inf"} 17
foo_count 17
foo_sum 324789.3
```

In this case, semantically one could say `_count` and `_bucket` series values represent a unit of `observations` or `1`. The `seconds` unit relate only to `le` label and `_sum` values in this case.

> For simplicity, we propose PromQL expect all the above series to have `__type__=histogram` and `__unit__=seconds`, despite. See [the related alternative](#omit-__unit__-label-from-counting-series-for-summaries-and-histograms).

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
For simplicity, we propose that PromQL should expect all the above series to have `__type__=histogram` and `__unit__=seconds` regardless. See [the related alternative](#omit-__unit__-label-from-counting-series-for-summaries-and-histograms).
```

### PromQL Changes

When a query for a metric returns multiple metrics with a different `__type__` or `__unit__` label, but the same `__name__`, an info annotation will be returned with the PromQL response, which is otherwise unmodified.

Aggregations and label matches ignore `__unit__` and `__type__` and any operation removes the `__unit__` and `__type__` label (except `label_replace`), similar to `__name__` semantics.

### Prometheus Server Ingestion

> When receiving OTLP or PRW 2.0, or when scraping the text, OM, or proto formats, the type and unit of the metric are interpreted and added as the `__type__` and `__unit__` labels. The Prometheus interpretation may change in the future and it depends on the parser/ingestion. 

Reviewer 3: What about the Remote Write clients? 
PRW 2.0: options:
- send both `__type__` and `__unit__` labels and metadata (krajo: this seems wasteful on account of duplicate data),
- do not send `__type__`, `__unit__` labels and rely on receiver to add them back based on the metadata (krajo: my choice, backwards compatible),
- send `__type__` and `__unit__` labels and no metadata (krajo: not possible because of missing help text).

PRW 1.0: 
- send both `__type__` and `__unit__` labels and metadata (krajo: seems wasteful on account of no symbol table for the labels),
- do not send `__type__`, `__unit__` labels and rely on receiver to add them back based on the metadata (krajo: not possible because metadata is sent out of band),
- send `__type__` and `__unit__` labels and no metadata (krajo: not possible because of missing help text).

Reviewer: Good finding! We had similar discussion in other places. 

@ArthurSens asked in https://github.com/prometheus/proposals/pull/39/files#r2042751436

Also, bigger discussion happened on https://cloud-native.slack.com/archives/C01AUBA4PFE/p1742372128946129?thread_ts=1741879011.950669&cid=C01AUBA4PFE

The agreement seemed to be to actually flexible and let receivers to prefer metadata, but use labels if exists (metadata overrides labels). I will update this proposal accordingly.

In your words I think it's: 

2.0:
* send metadata (required if you have type and unit info). You can also send __type__ and __unit__ labels if you have them, but it's optional and ignored, up to you. I don't worry about waste, it's all deduped.

1.0 
* send __type__ and __unit__ labels if you have type and unit info (optional). 1.0 DOES NOT HAVE METADATA officially, so I don't we should be even thinking about this case.

Reviewer: I changed the whole ingestion entry to

```
When receiving OTLP or PRW 2.0, or when scraping the text, OM, or proto formats, the type and unit of the metric are interpreted from **the metadata fields** and added as the `__type__` and `__unit__` labels. 
 
Generally clients should never expose type and unit labels directly as it's a special label starting with `__`. However, it can happen by accident or intentionally to support ingestion methods without metadata fields (e.g. PRW 1.0). That's why any existing user provided labels for `__unit__` and `__type__` should be *overridden* by the existing metadata mechanisms in current exposition and ingestion formats, otherwise we keep them on. 
 
Typeless (including unknown type), nameless and unitless entries will NOT produce any labels.
 
The Prometheus interpretation or validation of type and unit **values** may change in the future, and it depends on the parser/ingestion. For example for OpenMetrics parser, the [type is validated](https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/blob/2aaafae36fc0ba53b3a56643f6d6784c3d67002a/model/textparse/openmetricsparse.go#L464) to be case-sensitive subset [the defined OpenMetrics 1,0 types](https://prometheus.io/docs/specs/om/open_metrics_spec/#metric-types). Unit can be any string, with [some soft recommendations from OpenMetrics](https://prometheus.io/docs/specs/om/open_metrics_spec/#units-and-base-units). In other places, when we see an unsupported type value, Prometheus might normalize the value to the `unknown` string. Again, this may change and [another proposal for PromQL type and unit definition is required](#more-strict-unit-and-type-value-definition).

Users would be able to modify the type and unit of a metric at ingestion time by using `metric_relabel_configs`, and relabeling the `__type__` and `__unit__` labels.
```

Is it more clear?

 
For example for OpenMetrics parser, the [type is validated](https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/blob/2aaafae36fc0ba53b3a56643f6d6784c3d67002a/model/textparse/openmetricsparse.go#L464) to be case-sensitive subset [the defined OpenMetrics 1,0 types](https://prometheus.io/docs/specs/om/open_metrics_spec/#metric-types). Unit can be any string, with [some soft recommendations from the OpenMetrics](https://prometheus.io/docs/specs/om/open_metrics_spec/#units-and-base-units). In other places where see unsupported type, Prometheus might normalize the value to "unknown". Again, this may change and [another proposal for PromQL type and unit definition is required](#more-strict-unit-and-type-value-definition).

Generally clients should never expose type and unit labels as it's a special label starting with `__`. However, it can totally happen by accident or for custom SDKs and exporters. That's why any existing user provided labels for `__unit__` and `__type__` should be overridden by the existing metadata mechanisms in current exposition and ingestion formats. Typeless (including unknown type), nameless and unless entries will NOT produce any labels.

> For PRW 1.0, this logic is omitted because metadata is sent separately from timeseries, making it infeasible to add the labels at ingestion time.

Reviewer: Great question, answered in https://github.com/prometheus/proposals/pull/39/files#r2048730800

TL;DR: In practice we will produce those labels, and  fill metadata if users use experimental metadata mode

Users can modify the type and unit of a metric at ingestion time by using `metric_relabel_configs`, and relabeling the `__type__` and `__unit__` labels.

### Considerations

This solution solves all goals mentioned in [Goals](#goals). It also comes with certain disadvantages:

> * As [@pracucci mentioned](https://github.com/prometheus/proposals/pull/39/files#r19428174750), this change will technically allow users to query for "all" counters or "all" metrics with units which will likely pose DoS/cost for operators, long term storage systems and vendors. Given existing TSDB indexing, `__type__` and `__unit__` postings will have extreme amount of series referenced. More work **has to be done to detect, handle or even forbid such selectors, on their own.**. On top of that TSDB posting index size will increase too. This is however similar to any popular labels like `env=prod`.

Reviewer: Noted!

* All API parts (Series, LabelNames, LabelValues, Recordings/Alerts, remote APIs) will expose new labels without control. This means ecosystem will start depending on this, once this feature gets more mature, **potentially prohibiting the alternative approaches (e.g. only exposing `~seconds.counter` special syntax instead of raw `__type__=~".*"` selectors)**. We accept that risk.
* Downstream users might be surprised by the new labels e.g. in Cortex, Thanos, Mimir, vendors.

## Potential Future Extensions

Potential extensions, likely requiring dedicated proposals.

### Prometheus UI Changes

When displaying a metric's labels in the table or in the graph views, the UI will hide labels starting with `__` (double underscore) by default, similar to the current handling of `__name__`. A "Show System Labels" check-box might be added, which shows hidden labels when checked.

This is scoped down from the initial implementation due to complexity of the special feature flags in UI and the fact that majority of PromQL users in general might not use Prometheus UI, so we have to educate users on new labels, no matter what we do here.

### More strict unit and type value definition

> Current plan delegate definition to exposition and ingestion formats. Then also, generally it's not feasible to expect all the backends with all the

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
The current plan delegates the unit and type label definitions to exposition and ingestion formats. Generally, it's not feasible to expect all of the backends to be compatible with all of the
```

different types and units. For example for unit [OM unit is free-form string with the bias towards base units](https://prometheus.io/docs/specs/om/open_metrics_spec/#units-and-base-units) for OTLP semantic conventions it's [the UCUM](https://unitsofmeasure.org/ucum) standard. For types OpenMetrics define e.g. stateset, which neither Prometheus, or OTLP natively supports. OTLP defines `UpDownCounter` which does not natively exist in Prometheus or OpenMetrics.

> One could try to define standard translations or required subset of supported types in PromQL e.g. [the lowercase OpenMetrics types](https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/blob/2aaafae36fc0ba53b3a56643f6d6784c3d67002a/model/textparse/openmetricsparse.go#L464). This is essential if we want to have robust type or unit aware functions and operations in PromQL one day. Also, it's critical for the proposal of noticing mixed types being passed through the PromQL engine or auto-converting units.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
One could try to define standard translations or a required subset of supported types in PromQL, e.g. [the lowercase OpenMetrics types](https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/blob/2aaafae36fc0ba53b3a56643f6d6784c3d67002a/model/textparse/openmetricsparse.go#L464). This is essential for future functions and operations in PromQL that robustly utilize the type and unit information. Also, it's critical for auto-converting units and for properly handling mixed types being passed through the PromQL engine.
```

> One alternative is to say OpenMetrics types and units and everything else, before going to PromQL should be translated to OpenMetrics defined types and units. This is a bit limited, because Prometheus does not have native support to stateset and info metrics. We also plan to add delta type, which only exists in OTLP. For units, generally is not strictly defined in OpenMetrics, and [OTLP UCUM](https://unitsofmeasure.org/ucum) generally offers more functionality (e.g. standard way of representing concrete amount of batches of units e.g. 100 seconds).

Reviewer 9: The first sentence of this paragraph is a bit confusing.

> One alternative is to say OpenMetrics types and units and everything else, before going to PromQL should be translated to OpenMetrics defined types and units. This is a bit limited, because Prometheus does not have native support to stateset and info metrics. We also plan to add delta type, which only exists in OTLP. For units, generally is not strictly defined in OpenMetrics, and [OTLP UCUM](https://unitsofmeasure.org/ucum) generally offers more functionality (e.g. standard way of representing concrete amount of batches of units e.g. 100 seconds).

Reviewer 4: An attempt to reword, but I'm not sure I understood the original text correctly:

```suggestion
An alternative would be to convert external types and units to OpenMetrics defined types and units as they are ingested via OTLP or from other sources. This is a bit limited, because Prometheus itself does not even have native support (yet) for stateset and info metrics. We also plan to add delta types, which only exists in OTLP, but not (yet) in OpenMetrics or Prometheus itself. Units are generally not strictly defined in OpenMetrics, while [OTLP UCUM](https://unitsofmeasure.org/ucum) generally offers more functionality (e.g. standard way of representing concrete amount of batches of units e.g. 100 seconds).
```

> We propose to raise this problem in the Prometheus ecosystem and tackle it in different proposal. For now, Prometheus will use OpenMetrics type normalization and no unit definition.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We propose to raise this problem in the Prometheus ecosystem and tackle it in a different proposal. For now, Prometheus will use OpenMetrics type normalization and no unit definition.
```

Reviewer: Thanks for grammar fixes, but does this proposal makes sense to you? Do you see the challenge with lack of spec for those types and unit values? 🤔

Reviewer: or am I overreacting?

### Metric identity PromQL short syntax

For metric selection, currently our proposal aims for standard label matcher syntax like:

```
# All three ways are allowed: 
my_metric{__unit__="seconds", __type__="counter"}
{__name__"my_metric",__unit__="seconds", __type__="counter"}
{"my_metric",__unit__="seconds", __type__="counter"} 
``` 

> This is functional and feels familiar for labels, but similar to special `__name__` label, it could have much more convenient syntax available e.g.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This is functional and feels familiar for labels, but similar to special `__name__` label, a much more convenient syntax would be possible e.g.
```

# We can do consider without tilde too e.g.
my_metric.seconds.total{...}
my_metric.seconds.counter{...} 
```

Further notes:

* `~` for units and `.` for type is just one example, there might be better operators/characters to use.
* This proposal is fully compatible with the proposal above. `http_request_duration{__unit__="seconds", __type__="histogram"}` could just be another syntax for `http_request_duration~seconds.histogram`. It would make it much easier to add units and/or types to the metric name, so it would address the concern that you cannot see the unit and type anymore by looking at a PromQL expression without supporting tooling. If we allowed `.total` as an alias of `.counter`, we would have very little visible change. `http_requests_total` would become `http_requests.total`.

Writing queries that include the type and unit would be recommended as a best-practice by the community.

For example:

* Querying for `foo.histogram` would return results that include both `foo~seconds.histogram` and `foo~milliseconds.histogram`.
* Querying for `foo~seconds` would return results that include both `foo~seconds.histogram` and `foo~seconds.counter`.

> * Querying for `http_server_duration` would return results that include both `foo~seconds.histogram` and `foo~milliseconds.counter`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Querying for `http_server_duration` would return results that include both `http_server_duration~seconds.histogram` and `http_server_duration~milliseconds.counter`.
```

> * Querying for an OpenTelemetry metric, such as `http.server.duration`, with suffixes would require querying for `”http.server.duration”~seconds.histogram`. Note that suffixes are outside of quotes.

Reviewer 4: `”http.server.duration”~seconds.histogram` → `{"http.server.duration"}~seconds.histogram`

This extension/alternative has been discussed and rejected initially on the [2025-03-31 Prometheus DevSummit](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1uurQCi5iVufhYHGlBZ8mJMK_freDFKPG0iYBQqJ9fvA/edit?tab=t.0#bookmark=id.5gdzvuvgqaf5) due potentially surprising style and not visually appealing at the first glance look. It's true it might be too big of a leap and change for the ecosystem, given type and unit label has to be first proven and adopted in the ecosystem.

While rejected, we ([@bwplotka](https://github.com/bwplotka), [@beorn7](https://github.com/beorn7)) still believe it's a valid alternative or extension to do. Something to consider once/if type and unit labels is adopted.

### Handle __type__ and __unit__ in PromQL operations

> Initially, aggregations and label matches will ignore `__unit__` and `__type__` and all PromQL operations remove the `__unit__` and `__type__` label (except `label_replace`). Over time, we can update each function to keep these labels by implementing the appropriate logic. For example, adding two gauges together should yield a gauge, a rate of a counter, should probably be assumed to be a gauge.

Reviewer 4: "all PromQL operations": Above, it was mentioned that this only applies to operations removing the name. Let's use that approach here, too?

Remove comma after the last "counter".

However, this would re-introduce part of the problem we are trying to solve. Histogram buckets' `le` label's value is in the units of the metric. If the unit is not included in the labels of the histogram bucket series, series with `le=1000` in seconds, for example, would collide with series with `le=1000` in milliseconds. We could include the unit in the `le` label (e.g. `le=1000s`), but that would be much more disruptive to users without much additional benefit.

The `_count` series of histograms and summaries could omit the `__unit__` label without this consequence, since the count does not have any relation to the unit. This proposal includes the `__unit__` label for consistency so that users can always query for metrics that have a specific unit.

### Special __type__ values for some classic histogram and summary series

We also discussed special [types](https://github.com/prometheus/proposals/pull/39#discussion_r1927374088) and could put to histogram e.g. _count series.

Rejected due to complexity.

### __type__ and __unit__ from client libraries

> There is an unwritten rule, claiming that client libraries are not allowed to expose special labels starting with `__` e.g. see [the client_golang check](https://github.com/prometheus/client_golang/blob/34eaefd8a58ff01b243b36a369615859932de9d8/prometheus/labels.go#L187). This combined

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There is an unwritten rule, claiming that client libraries are not allowed to expose special labels starting with `__` e.g. see [the client_golang check](https://github.com/prometheus/client_golang/blob/34eaefd8a58ff01b243b36a369615859932de9d8/prometheus/labels.go#L187).
```

One obvious extension of this proposal would be for Prometheus clients to start sending `__type__` and `__unit__` labels with the exposition format. This would:

* Allow mixing metrics with the same name, but different types and units in the same endpoint (an explicit non-goal of this proposal).

This is excluded from this proposal because:

* OpenTelemetry users can use [Views](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/metrics/sdk/#view) to resolve collisions. That should be "good enough".
* Doing this would require some changes to client libraries, which is significantly more work, and is harder to experiment with.
* There can be conflicts between `# TYPE` and `# UNIT` metadata for a metric, and `__type__` and `__unit__` labels. This adds complexity to understanding the exposition format, and requires establishing rules for dealing with conflicts.

## Open Questions

> 1. Should we actually clearly [define PromQL supported types and units in this proposal](#more-strict-unit-and-type-value-definition)? Is there a way to delegate it to another one given a scope?

Reviewer 2: I think all parsers included in Prometheus already do this validation, no? I'm not 100% sure, but I think we can't expose metric types that Prometheus doesn't support.. it will fail the scrape with errors

Reviewer: TODO: Explain the problem more.

Reviewer: Explained in ### More strict unit and type value definition

It depends on your ingestion format. Especially with this rule we mention in `Prometheus Server Ingestion` section where we accept type and unit label if metadata is not set (or metadata support is missing) - it's likely easy to inject `SeCoNdS` value.

* Querying for `foo~seconds` would return results that include both `foo~seconds.histogram` and `foo~seconds.counter`.
* Querying for `http_server_duration` would return results that include both `http_server_duration~seconds.histogram` and `http_server_duration~milliseconds.counter`.
* Querying for an OpenTelemetry metric, such as `http.server.duration`, with suffixes would require querying for `”{http.server.duration}”~seconds.histogram`. Note that suffixes are outside of quotes.

This extension/alternative has been discussed and rejected initially on the [2025-03-31 Prometheus DevSummit](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1uurQCi5iVufhYHGlBZ8mJMK_freDFKPG0iYBQqJ9fvA/edit?tab=t.0#bookmark=id.5gdzvuvgqaf5) due potentially surprising style and not visually appealing at the first glance look. It's true it might be too big of a leap and change for the ecosystem, given type and unit label has to be first proven and adopted in the ecosystem.

While rejected, we ([@bwplotka](https://github.com/bwplotka), [@beorn7](https://github.com/beorn7)) still believe it's a valid alternative or extension to do. Something to consider once/if type and unit labels is adopted.

> ### Handle __type__ and __unit__ in PromQL operations

Reviewer: cc

## Metric Family Identity Extension: Type and Unit as Labels

* **Owners:**
  * David Ashpole [@dashpole](https://github.com/dashpole)
  * Bartek Plotka [@bwplotka](https://github.com/bwplotka)

* **Implementation Status:** `Accepted`

* **Related Issues and PRs:**
  * https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/2497

* **Other docs or links:**
  * Initial implementation: https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/pull/16228
  * Survey Results: https://opentelemetry.io/blog/2024/prometheus-compatibility-survey/
  * Slack thread: https://cloud-native.slack.com/archives/C01AUBA4PFE/p1726399373207819
  * Doc with Options: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1t4ARkyOoI4lLNdKb0ixbUz7k7Mv_eCiq7sRKHAGZ9vg
  * Vision docs:
    * https://docs.google.com/document/d/10Z1XKeQXxJAc_jKW0qEC8G4krlPTmE89k31FJfPVbro
    * https://docs.google.com/document/d/1PY0SzpeEmuH4Uxt887hnKsHplHGR1FnmR-8mf9wp06A
  * Prometheus PoCs:
    * (first) https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/compare/main...dashpole:prometheus:type_and_unit_labels
    * (second) https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/pull/16025

>   * Vision docs: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

  * Blocker for [delta type](https://docs.google.com/document/d/15ujTAWK11xXP3D-EuqEWTsxWiAlbBQ5NSMloFyF93Ug/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.5sybau7waq2q).
* [Required] OpenTelemetry users can query for the original names of their metrics.
* [Nice to have] Path for the further innovations around metric identity (e.g. [seamless renames](https://www.google.com/url?q=https://sched.co/1txHv&sa=D&source=docs&ust=1742288864071431&usg=AOvVaw06J0dGuqUNJPPPNF17Eeg8))
* [Nice to have] Improve PromQL UX that errors/warns when using "inappropriate" operations for a metric type.
* [Nice to have] OpenTelemetry users can grep for the original names in the text exposition.

### Audience

This document is for Prometheus server maintainers, PromQL maintainers, and anyone interested in furthering compatibility between Prometheus and OpenTelemetry.

## Non-Goals

* Propose auto-convert between units when there is a conflict.
* Propose auto-convert between types (e.g. native histogram vs float series).
* Allow mixing metrics with the same name, but different type or unit in the exposition format. See potential future extensions.
* Design special PromQL syntax for type and unit in this proposal.

## How

> We propose adding special `__unit__` and `__type__` labels that combined with `__name__` metric name compose a "metric identity". Initially behind a `type-and-unit-labels` feature flag, but opt-out once stable. Type and unit values are defined by the exposition and ingestion formats. We propose the initial PromQL handling of various type and unit to be initially tied to [OpenMetrics 1.0 types](https://prometheus.io/docs/specs/om/open_metrics_spec/#metric-types) and subject to a future breaking change (tackled in [a different proposal](#more-strict-unit-and-type-value-definition)).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We propose adding special `__unit__` and `__type__` labels that combined with `__name__` metric name compose a "metric family identity". Initially behind a `type-and-unit-labels` feature flag, but opt-out once stable. Type and unit values are defined by the exposition and ingestion formats. We propose the initial PromQL handling of various type and unit to be initially tied to [OpenMetrics 1.0 types](https://prometheus.io/docs/specs/om/open_metrics_spec/#metric-types) and subject to a future breaking change (tackled in [a different proposal](#more-strict-unit-and-type-value-definition)).
```

## Non-Goals

* Propose auto-convert between units when there is a conflict.
* Propose auto-convert between types (e.g. native histogram vs float series).
* Allow mixing metrics with the same name, but different type or unit in the exposition format. See potential future extensions.

> * Design special PromQL syntax for type and unit in this proposal.

Reviewer 5: 👍🏻
